29 June 2006Cabinet met at the Union Buildings, before a brief recess. Cabinet finalised the two-monthly reports from Cabinet Committees on implementation of Government's Programme of Action. The media will be briefed on progress in the POA during the week beginning 2 July 2006 and the Programme of Action on the government website will be updated. The meeting examined a strategy for the restructuring of the Road Accident Fund, proposing amongst other things, the introduction of a no-fault system of benefits for all victims of road accidents and a Road Accident Fund benefit scheme intended to improve healthcare outcomes for those injured in road accidents. Cabinet approved distribution of the document for public comment. Cabinet was briefed on the outbreak of Polio in Namibia . It noted that South Africa had been successful in the eradication of polio within its borders, but took the view that although no cases had been reported in the country for the past 15 years; we could not afford to be complacent. The government has been assisting the Namibian Government in dealing with the outbreak, amongst others through provision of laboratory test services and vaccine cooler boxes. Cabinet commended Namibian Government for its speedy intervention. Cabinet approved the following appointments: The meeting was briefed on measures needed to meet the Black Economic Empowerment objectives as and when state-owned enterprises (SOEs) dispose of assets. A number of SOEs have finalised and others are finalising plans for the disposal of such non-core assets. The guidelines, which will be published shortly, will ensure a coherent approach across the relevant public enterprises reporting to DPE; a clear set of empowerment criteria to the market; and mechanisms for setting and achieving empowerment targets through disposal of these non-core assets. Cabinet welcomed the elections to be held in the Democratic Republic of Congo on the 30 July 2006. These elections represent for the Congolese what our 1994 elections represented for us and mark the culmination of over ten years of peace efforts by the people of the DRC. Our IEC, together with a number of South African institutions and companies have been providing different kinds of assistance and support. Cabinet expressed its gratitude to the government of the DRC for affording South Africans the opportunity to make a humble contribution to this historic process. Cabinet noted the events leading to the shooting in which four members of the SAPS lost their lives and eight criminals were shot dead. Government would like to re-affirm its appreciation of the role of SAPS in fighting crime and to emphasise the message that crime should not and does not pay. We express our empathy and condolences to the families, friends and colleagues of the fallen members of the SAPS and call on all South Africans to unite against crime. Cabinet noted the tragic death of 14 teachers in a road accident in the North West Province and expressed its condolences with the families, friends, pupils and colleagues of the teachers. Cabinet expressed its appreciation of the steps taken by the North West government to support the affected communities. The meeting noted that the emblem for the 2010 FIFA World Cup would be unveiled in Berlin on 7 July 2006. As the 2006 FIFA World Cup reaches its climax in Germany , the world will be watching us carefully to judge whether we will be ready to host this prestigious event. Cabinet expressed its confidence that South Africa will be ready and called on all sectors of our society to work together in a national effort to ensure that South Africa , working with the rest of the continent, hosts the best World Cup ever. Cabinet congratulated the five African countries that represented the African continent in the 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany , especially Ghana for carrying the torch beyond the first round, on behalf of millions of Africans around the world. Whatever the outcome of individual matches, there cannot be any doubt that African football has come of age. Cabinet received a report from the National Security Council (NSC) on the Khampepe Commission Report into the mandate and location of the Directorate of Special Operations (DSO). The report had been referred by the President to the NSC for further consideration. Cabinet endorsed the decisions of the NSC as reflected in the attached Statement. Enquiries Themba J Maseko - Government Spokesperson Cell: 083 645 0810 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top