14 June 2006Cabinet was today briefed on new scientific information and the economics of climate change. In the main, the new data point to a potential for more adverse effects of climate change in terms of biodiversity, sea-levels for coastal cities, economic potential of various regions and so on. Cabinet reaffirmed decisions that had earlier been taken to mitigate this process, and agreed that these programmes, including the introduction of renewable energy sources, should be scaled up. It was also agreed that the SA Earth Observation System (SAEOS) Strategy should be implemented taking this new information into account. The following appointments were approved or confirmed: The meeting approved the submission to parliament, for ratification, of the Instrument of Amendment of the Constitution of the ILO. Cabinet noted plans for the release of the Macrosocial Report, "A nation in the making", which is meant to take place in a week's time. Government calls on all South Africans to engage the issues identified in the report, the better to improve national partnership in building a caring society. The meeting noted the continuing campaign by Mr Zahir Omar, the legal representative of Pakistani national, Mr Khalid Rashid to besmirch the name of our government and our country regarding Rashid's deportation from our country. Government wishes to reiterate that it has exercised its constitutional and legal responsibility to deport an illegal foreigner from our country, in accordance with prescribed procedures. Because of allegations regarding Mr Rashid's links with international terrorist organisations, the deportation was conducted in co-operation with Pakistani authorities; and these authorities have confirmed in writing that Mr Rashid was received in that country in good health. As such, if indeed Mr Omar is genuinely interested in assisting Mr Rashid's family to establish his whereabouts, he should take this matter up in Pakistan. Government is in no doubt that the overwhelming majority of South Africans, including the Muslim community, are committed to work together in pursuit of our common security as a nation, and to work with the international community in promoting peace and stability throughout the world. Government wishes to congratulate all South African youth on the occasion of June 16, the 30 th anniversary of the youth uprising against the system of apartheid. This occasion affords us an opportunity not only to honour the heroes of our struggle; but also to work together to expand, and take advantage of, opportunities provided by democracy. Government will continue with its efforts to deepen youth participation in development; and it will do so taking into account proposals emerging from the recently-held National Youth Convention. Enquiries Joel Netshitenzhe Cell: 082 900 0083 Issued by: Government Communication (GCIS) Themba James Maseko was born on 27 January 1964. He attended Immaculata High School in Diepkloof, Soweto , matriculating in 1982. He obtained a BA in Sociology and Law at the University of the Witwatersrand in 1987 and an LLB at the same institution in 1992. He was awarded an MBA by Demontfort University (UK) in 2002. During the 1980s and early 1990s he played a leading role in the education sector of the mass democratic movement. This included the South African National Students Congress (SANSCO); Azanian Students Organisation; and from 1990 the National Education Co-ordinating Committee whose General Secretary he was from 1991 to1993. He also served on the Gauteng Regional Executive Committee of the South African Communist Party. He was elected an ANC Member of Parliament in 1994; and in 1995 he took up the position of Superintendent-General of the Gauteng Department of Education, where he served until 2000. During 2001 and 2002 he worked in the private sector as Managing Director of the Damelin Education Group and CEO of Sifikile Investments. He served for three years as Director-General of the Department of Public Works, from February 2003 to February 2006. In the period before his appointment as CEO of GCIS he has been active in the private sector, positions he will relinquish on assuming duty as CEO of GCIS. Mr Maseko is a member of the boards of Adopt a School Foundation and the Centre for Public Service Innovation, and of Vista University Council. top 